===================
The DistKV tutorial
===================

Installation
============

This part is easy. ``pip install distkv``.

You now have, or should have, a ``distkv`` command-line utility. If not,
use this script::

   #!/usr/bin/env python3

   import sys
   # sys.path[0:0] = (".", "../asyncserf")  # for development

   from distkv.command import cmd
   cmd()


You also need a running `Serf <http://serf.io>` daemon.

Start the server
================

You start an initial server with this command::

   one $ distkv server -i Root $(hostname)
   Running.

By default, your DistKV server will talk to the local Serf process.
You can configure the destination by adapting the config file::

   one $ distkv -C server.serf.host=my-serfer server -i Root $(hostname)

You can now retrieve the root value::

   one $ distkv client data get
   "Root"
   one $

As the purpose of DistKV is to be a *distributed* key-value storage, 
you can start another server on a different host::

   two $ distkv server $(hostname)
   Running.


This will take a few seconds for the servers to sync up with each other.
You can verify that the second server has successfully synced up::

   two $ distkv client data get
   "Root"
   two $

You can now kill the first server and restart it::

   one $ killall distkv
   one $ distkv server $(hostname)
   Running.

You must **never** start a server with the ``-i`` option, unless you're
creating a new and separate DistKV network. (You can create entirely
separate networks by changing the ``server.root`` config variable.)


Data commands
=============

You might want to add an alias for "distkv client data" so that you don't
have to type so much::

   one $ dkd() { distkv client data "$@"; }

Then, you can store arbitrary data at random DistKV nodes::

   one $ dkd set -ev 123 one two three
   one $ dkd set -ev 1234 one two three four
   one $ dkd set -v Duh one two three four five
   one $ dkd get one two three
   123
   one $ dkd get one two three four five
   "Duh"
   one $

The ``-e`` flag tells the ``set`` command to evaluate the given data as a
Python expression. You can store numbers, True/False/None, binary and
Unicode strings, lists/tuples, and hashes composed of these.

All values are independent. DistKV's storage is still organized
hierarchically, (among other reasons) for ease of retrieval::

    one $ dkd get -ryd_ one
    one:
      two:
        three:
          _: 123
          four:
            _: 1234
            five:
              _: Duh
    one $

The root value is not special; by convention, it identifies the DistKV
network.


Persistent storage
==================

DistKV keeps everything in memory (for now). If you want your data to
survive a power outage, you might want to tell your server to save them::

   one $ distkv client log dest /var/local/lib/distkv.$(date +%Y%m%d).state

This command writes the current state to this file. The server keeps it
open and appends new records to it. The ``log dest`` has options to either
not start with a complete state dump, or to just write a one-shot dump.

When you need to restart your DistKV system from scratch, simply pass the
newest saved state file::

    one $ distkv server -l $(ls -t /var/local/lib/distkv.*.state | head -1) $(hostname)
    Running.

This command is somewhat safe to use on a network that's already running;
your node may run with old state for a few seconds, until it retrieves the
updates that happened while it was down. An option to delay startup until
that process has completed is on the TODO list.

In a typical DistKV network, at most two or three nodes will use persistent
storage; all others simply syncs up with their peers whenever they are
restarted.


Authorization
=============

DistKV initially doesn't come up with any authorization scheme. However,
advanced uses require the ability to distinguish between users.

Let's set up a "root" user::

    one $ distkv client auth -m password user add name=joe password?=Code
    Code: ******
    one $ distkv client auth -m password user list
    joe
    one $ distkv client auth -m password init -s
    Authorization switched to password
    one $

(The input at the "Code:" prompt is not echoed.)

After this point, you can no longer use DistKV without a password::

    one $ dkd get
    ClientAuthRequiredError: You need to log in using: password
    one $

    one $ ./kv client -a "password name=joe password?=Code" data get
    Code: ******
    "Root"
    one $

Internal data are stored in a separate DistKV subtree that starts with a ``None`` value.
You can display it::

    one $ distkv client -a "password name=joe password=test123" data get -ryd_
    null:
      auth:
        _:
          current: password
        password:
          user:
            joe:
              _:
                _aux: null
                password: !!binary |
                  7NcYcNGWMxapfjrDQIyYNa2M8PPBvHA1J8MCZVNPda4=
    one:
      two:
        three:
          _: 123
          four:
            _: 1234
            five:
              _: Duh
    
As you can see, passwords are encrypted -- hashed, actually. The exact
scheme depends on the auth method. The data below ``None`` (or "null" in
YAML syntax) are otherwise inaccessible.

NB: nothing prevents you from using the string ``"null"`` as an ordinary
key name::

   one $ distkv client -a "password name=joe password=test123" data set -v bar null foo
   one $ distkv client -a "password name=joe password=test123" data get -ryd_
   â€¦
   'null':
     foo:
       _: bar

For experimentation, there's also a ``_test`` method which only exposes a
user name::

   one $ distkv client auth -m _test user add name=joe
   one $ distkv client auth -m _test user add name=root
   one $ distkv client auth -m _test init
   one $ distkv client data get
   ClientAuthRequiredError: You need to log in using: _test
   one $ dkv() { distkv client -a "_test name=joe" "$@"; }
   one $ dkv data get
   123
   one $

We'll use that user and alias in the following sections.

ACLs and distributed servers
----------------------------

DistKV servers use the client protocol when they sync up. Thus, when you
set up authorization, you must teach your servers to authenticate to their
peer::

   one $ distkv -C connect.auth="_test name=joe" server $(hostname)


Access restrictions
===================

A user can be restricted from accessing or modifying DistKV data.

Let's say that we'd like to create a "write-only" data storage::

   one $ dkv acl set writeonly -a "xc" wom '#'
   one $ dkv data set -ev 42 wom foo bar
   one $ dkv data set -ev 43 wom foo bar
   ServerError: (<AclEntry:[None, 'acl', 'writeonly', 'wom', '#']@<NodeEvent:<Node: test1 @10> @4 1> ='cx'>, 'w')
   one $ dkv data get wom foo
   ServerError: (<AclEntry:[None, 'acl', 'writeonly', 'wom', '#']@<NodeEvent:<Node: test1 @10> @4 1> ='cx'>, 'r')
   one $

As you can see, this allows the user to write to arbitrary values, but Joe
cannot change anything, nor can he read the values which he wrote.

Note that we also created a "root" user who doesn't have ACL restrictions.
If we had not, we'd now be locked out of our DistKV storage because "no
matching ACL" means "no access".

A user who has an ACL set can no longer modify the system, because the
``None`` element that separates system data from the rest cannot match a
wildcard. ACLs for system entries are on the TODO list.



Code execution
==============

DistKV doesn't just store passive data: you can also use it to distribute
actual computing. We'll demonstrate that here.
